---
layout:       post
title:        "Zeroing a Column of a CSV File With PowerShell"
date:         2024-07-26 20:30:00 +0200
---

Earlier today at [work](https://www.suedweststrom.de), a coworker called in with a little data munging task for me to solve: a column of a CSV file supplied by a third party on a regular basis needed to be redacted (for technical rather than sneaky reasons) before the file was passed along to another third party.

For more complex operations on tabular data (transposing rows/columns or, say, inflicting math upon them), we usually rely on Python scripts (...anything's better than Excel macros). But this "problem" seemed simple enough to make the overhead of setting up a virtual environment plus the usual CSV input/output boilerplate seem like [shooting at sparrows with cannons](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mit_Kanonen_auf_Spatzen_schießen) – so I ignored my reflexive aversion[^aversion] to Microsoft technology and looked into how to get this done in PowerShell, which is conveniently built into our task automation software[^wontlink] of choice.

[^aversion]: Although I just learned that PowerShell is also available on macOS and there's [some nifty stuff](https://community.jumpcloud.com/t5/radical-admin-blog/powershell-for-the-mac-admin-part-5-pivot/ba-p/2755) you can do with it. Hmm!

[^wontlink]: Whose name I shan't utter for opsec reasons.


## Importing a CSV file into a PowerShell session

The CSV files in question come in a format that has its roots in [ComTrader](https://portal.m7.energy/plpx/documentation/), a popular frontend to the [European Energy Exchange](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Energy_Exchange), making it a quasi-standard for exchanging power trading data within parts of Germany's energy industry.

```csv
Area;Type;B/S;Accnt;Product;Ctrct;Qty;Prc;BG;Txt;PQty;ValRes;ValDate;ExeRes
TNG;REG;S;P;XBID_Quarter_Hour_Power;23Q1;0.5;-500;Standard;Comment;;GTD;04.07.2024 21:50:00;NON
AMP;REG;S;P;XBID_Quarter_Hour_Power;23Q1;1.5;-500;Standard;Comment;;GTD;04.07.2024 21:50:00;NON
```

Reading a semicolon-separated CSV file into a PowerShell variable can be a accomplished using the `Import-Csv` cmdlet:

```powershell
$csv = Import-Csv -Delimiter ';' 'C:\path\to\file.csv'
```

This'll yield, as described in [the documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/import-csv?view=powershell-7.4), a "table-like custom object from the items in the CSV file. Each column in the CSV file becomes a property of the custom object and the items in rows become the property values."


## Zeroing a column

The cool thing about these table-like objects appears to be that they're query-able by, among[^group] others, the rather powerful `Select-Object` cmdlet. You could, for example, extract the columns[^properties] `Qty` (*power quantity* if you're curious) and `Prc` (*price*) like this:

[^group]: Another cmdlet worth [looking at](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.utility/group-object?view=powershell-7.4) is `Group-Object`. But wait, `Select-...`? `Group-...`? That almost sounds [like SQL]({% post_url 2018-01-02-matrix %})!

[^properties]: What I call "columns" are really *properties* in PowerShell, but I'll be sticking to CSV terminology.

```powershell
$csv | Select-Object 'Qty','Prc'
```

That'd yield a two-column table, ready for re-serialization or further processing. Relatedly, here's how to extract *all columns except* `Prc`:

```powershell
$csv | Select-Object * -ExcludeProperty 'Prc'
```

You can also use `Select-Object`, albeit in a slightly-more-syntactically-convoluted manner, to generate *new* columns [based on values of existing columns](https://community.spiceworks.com/t/replace-blank-values-with-null-in-csv-for-specific-column-all-columns/954877). If you wanted to, say, append a column `HalfPrc` containing the values of the `Prc` column divided by 2, you could run this command:

```powershell
$csv | Select-Object *, @{Name='HalfPrc'; Expression={.5*[float]$_.prc}
```

Similarly, to empty the `Prc` column (which is what my colleague was after), I arrived at the following command which, as above, selects everything except the preexisting `Prc` column, then adds a new `Prc` column containing only empty strings, storing the result in a variable `$csv_fixed`:

```powershell
$csv_fixed = $csv | Select-Object -ExcludeProperty 'Prc' *, @{Name='Prc'; Expression={''}}
```

Note that new columns created this way are *appended* to the table – so the new `Prc` column ends up, visually speaking, at the right end of the table, not in the same location as the previous `Prc` column.


## Writing the result out

Knowing that there's an `Import-Csv` cmdlet, you won't have trouble guessing how to export `$csv_fixed` back into a CSV file:

```powershell
$csv_fixed | Export-Csv -Delimiter ';' -NoTypeInformation 'C:\path\to\output_file.csv'
```

By default, PowerShell adds a *type information header* like `#TYPE Selected.System.Management.Automation.PSCustomObject` to the generated CSV file, which can (and probably should) be suppressed via the `-NoTypeInformation` switch.

The resulting CSV file, then, looks like this:

```csv
"Area";"Type";"B/S";"Accnt";"Product";"Ctrct";"Qty";"Prc";"BG";"Txt";"PQty";"ValRes";"ValDate";"ExeRes"
"TNG";"REG";"S";"P";"XBID_Quarter_Hour_Power";"23Q1";"0.5";"";"Standard";"Comment";"";"GTD";"04.07.2024 21:50:00";"NON"
"AMP";"REG";"S";"P";"XBID_Quarter_Hour_Power";"23Q1";"1.5";"";"Standard";"Comment";"";"GTD";"04.07.2024 21:50:00";"NON"
```

Notice that PowerShell wraps each value in quotes, which, while unnecessary in this case, is good practice and won't confuse [standards](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4180)-compliant CSV consumers.
