---
layout:       post
title:        "Something wrong with your `venv`? Just reset it!"
date:         2024-04-06 20:00:00 +0200
---

Most folks developing Python applications will have experienced instances of a virtual environment *(for non-snake-charmers: a directory containing a specific version of the Python interpreter and relevant libraries bound to a project, avoiding dependecy hell when working on multiple projects in parallel)* that's been chugging along nicely for months on their local development machine just kind of breaking – be it due to a botched dependency downgrade, a change in the Python setup[^brew], or an even more arcane reason.

[^brew]: In my case, this tends to happen when I upgrade some [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) package (say, `yt-dlp`) whose new version depends (whether technically required or not) on a newer-than-installed Python version. During this transitive upgrade process, previous Python versions sometimes end up being uninstalled (or, at the very least, relevant symlinks get borked).

It's not a common occurrence, but it happens.

The easiest way of fixing things, if you've been keeping track of your project's dependencies, tends to be simply deleting the old virtual environment, creating a fresh one, and reinstalling the dependencies. **That's a sequence of three steps you need to perform in the correct order – so it's ripe for automation!**

Depending on where you keep your virtual environments (in my case: alongside each project, *i.e.*, created via `python3 -m venv .`), how you install dependencies (commonly `pip3 install -r requirements.txt`) and any other specifics, a Bash script similar to the following should do[^alsosetup] the trick:

[^alsosetup]: Since it's designed to skip the deletion of the old virtual environment if none is present, I've also found it handy for bootstrapping a new project.

```sh
#!/bin/bash

if [ ! -z "$VIRTUAL_ENV" ]; then
    echo "Deactivating..."
    deactivate
else
    echo "No venv active, skipped 'deactivate' step."
fi
if [ -f "pyvenv.cfg" ]; then
    echo "Nuking old virtual environment..."
    rm pyvenv.cfg
    rm -r bin
    rm -r include
    rm -r lib
else
    echo "No 'pyvenv.cfg' file present, skipped nuking step."
fi
echo "Setting up a fresh virtual environment..."
python3 -m venv .
echo "Activating..."
source bin/activate
if [ -f "requirements.txt" ]; then
    echo "Reinstalling from requirements.txt..."
    pip3 install -r requirements.txt
else
    echo "No 'requirements.txt' found, skipped reinstall step."
fi
```

Paste these lines of code ([modulo](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/modulo) any modifications needed to match your workflow) into a file named `revenv`, place it in a directory that's on[^path] your `$PATH` and make sure the file's executable: run `chmod u+x revenv`, for instance. Then, when you're in need of resetting a virtual environment, simply `cd` to your project's directory and run `revenv`.

[^path]: A common choice of directory is `~/local/bin` – which you can put on your `$PATH` by adding `export PATH="$HOME/local/bin:$PATH` to your [`.bashrc` and/or `.bash_profile`](https://linuxize.com/post/bashrc-vs-bash-profile/) – but I tend to instead maintain small utilities like this as functions [in my `.bashrc`](https://github.com/doersino/dotfiles/blob/master/.bashrc). To each their own.
