---
layout:       post
title:        "Popping up a Notification When a macOS App Stops Running"
date:         2024-04-01 16:15 +0200
---

On my laptop, in lieu of the official [Dropbox](https://www.dropbox.com) client (which does *a lot*, much more than I need, which is: keeping a folder in sync), I've been using [Maestral](https://maestral.app) for a couple of years now. It works beautifully except on rare occasions when it silently crashes – it's a [known issue](https://github.com/samschott/maestral/issues/808), difficult to reproduce, and the developer's working on it. One of these days it'll be fixed and I'll rejoice.

Until then, I'd rather not get caught out working on old versions on stuff, so I've implemented an extremely basic watchdog in the form of a Bash script that 1. checks if anything called "Maestral" is running on my system and, if not, 2. lets me know about it by popping up a notification.

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

if ! pgrep Maestral; then
    osascript -e 'display notification "It probably crashed, so try starting it manually." with title "Maestral might not be running!"'
fi
```

*There's not much to it:* The `pgrep` utility enables us to look up running processes by name, printing any matching process IDs to standard output. If no matches are found, it returns a non-zero exit code, meaning that by inverting it using `!`, the body of the conditional is executed when Maestral is *not* running (*i.e.*, when it's most likely crashed). An easy way of displaying notifications [is provided](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/LanguagesUtilities/Conceptual/MacAutomationScriptingGuide/DisplayNotifications.html) by `osascript`, the native AppleScript interpreter.

I have my computer run this script every five minutes as a good ol' cron job, for which I've appended the following line to my crontab (edit yours by running `crontab -e`):

```
*/5 * * * * bash "path/to/script.sh"
```

Another way to fix the problem in this case is adjusting Maestral's `launchd` configuration, adding `<key>KeepAlive</key>` as described [here](https://github.com/samschott/maestral/issues/808#issuecomment-2018973851) to have the operating system restart Maestral automatically whenever it crashes. My "technique" requires manual intervention to get things going again, but it's more flexible: You could, for instance, use a variant of it to receive a notification when a long-running process finishes.
